Now, another issue that I was thinking about was once you were successful in another country, I would think, and I don't want to put words in your mouth, but I would think there would be some jealousy from some of the nationals, maybe the government nationals, or maybe the scientific community in Mexico.
Was there?
There may have been with this one old senior scientist.
at one point.
And I think it was particularly so in some of the other crops.
But I was working on wheat, which he started out on, and I used to see him quite frequently, and I think I circumvented a lot of this by stopping by to see him.
But there's certain resentment there because of fear.
Because if you see these kinds of changes taking place,
The people I subsequently learned in other countries are bound to feel, hell, somebody's going to ask the question, why didn't you do it?
So, you can understand us.
About in 1956... And of course, he was there all alone.
He couldn't do it.
As far as the nationals, the young people who are trained, of course, they're part of the team.
You don't get into that.
No, no.
And they're proud to be part of the team.
Probably, yes.
As a matter of fact, some of them— My prestige, I would imagine.
And some of those also kind of irritate some of the old guard.
Sure.
You've got to watch— They're sort of a new wave of scientists, you know.
You've got to watch that they don't overdo it.
And I would imagine in a rather undeveloped setting, these young scientists would think anyway that they probably would hold a lot of prestige in the community.
Of course.
Sure.
Did any of them ever get into politics?
Yes.
Some of them became secretaries of agriculture.
Yeah.
I would guess so.
By 1956, I read that you were considering going down to Panama and helping them with a banana fungus.
This was in Honduras, United Fruit Company.
Oh, United Fruit Company.
Tell me about this.
I guess it was in 56 or 57.
When I could see that the job that I was doing was finishing, I had a chance to.
go to the United Fruit Company and work on Fusarium wilt.
The banana plantations used to become infected with this wilt.
And the result was there was no active control.
You'd have to move out, abandon the whole plantation, develop new land, put in the irrigation, the whole damn thing.
It was a very, very expensive operation.
and so at that time they were considering starting a, they had a small breeding program for many years, testing different things, but they were going into looking for varietal resistance and for a time I was considering this and this was all at the same time when
The job was turning down, I was turning it over to Narvaez, the Mexican Wheat Program.
It was about the time when I was looking at the wheat problems in Latin America and then a year later or so.
from Morocco to India.
And when I suggested, well, why don't I have a look at soybeans?
All of this was in the mill about the same time.
So I decided not to go.
When the foundation said, no, we're going to look at some of these other problems, because the crunch was on in the early 60s, you see, for food in the Indian subcontinent, like it is in Africa now.
Okay, well let's go to 1960 then.
Did you feel, for the most part by that time, that you had completed your mission?
Yes.
Were you itchy, ready to move on?
As it was perceived, yeah.
Now the mission, of course, had expanded tremendously, but did you think that you were ready to move on?
Yeah, I didn't want to be just excess baggage, and I didn't want to sit there and get in the way of the young Mexican people that
trained.
And I didn't know what I was going to do.
As I pointed out there, we were looking at quite a few things.
Then when they sent me on this trip, 59, I went through Latin America.
Right, for the Rockefeller Foundation.
60, with Rockefeller and FAO, Food and Agriculture Organization, went across looking at wheat problems from Morocco to India.
And I found everywhere, with the exception of two countries, shortage of trained people.
The only two countries where there did not have this shortage of wheat scientists was India and Egypt.
And in both of those countries, I saw them frittering away their time, well-trained scientists, working on things of secondary importance rather than getting at the
crux of the problems.
Very often they were continuing to do things that they'd done for their doctored thesis in some foreign country, rather than go out and take a look at the big broad picture of how to change production.
I should have pointed out that all the way along, I think this is back, let me go back again.
In Mexico, the real difference between wheat and corn
was that we integrated across disciplines.
I knew that there was no magic in the variety alone.
I knew that unless you restored soil fertility, unless you planted that variety at the right time and the right way, handled the water, if it was irrigation water properly or conserved it if it was rain-fed, you weren't going anyplace.
Same way on weeds and insects and diseases.
I also got a pretty good insight working with the farmers co-ops on this whole pricing situation, both for fertilizer and for the grain.
And so, through a stroke of bad luck, you have to patch and splice.
The first eight years, we had one, two, four agronomist soil scientists.
It so happened that the turnover was very great.
But the first year when I was there, since I still didn't have the wheat program going very well, I mean, it wasn't full-time, I would work with fertilizer also with Dr. William Caldwell, who was the first soil scientist, putting in the fertilizer test on corn and wheat and taking the results.
Then when he left, we continued
as best we could.
We got another soil scientist, and the same thing was repeated, and so we just kept doing this.
Whereas in corn, they never did this.
When they'd lose the agronomists, why, they'd quit.
But we would take our wheat team and put tests out on farms as best we could, probably not nearly so effectively or efficiently as they should have been done, but nevertheless, we were gaining experience.
This turned out to be the difference.
I mean, we could look at the forest, not stand behind the one tree, varietal improvement, and the corn program never did.
They, for some unknown reason, seemed to believe that if you got the magic variety, all of the other pieces would come together by itself, and it just doesn't.
And I'd learned this long before we moved to...
the Near East or to other South American countries.
I learned it in Mexico.
Just as an aside, it's really interesting to me about corn itself, because I did some interviews at Purdue University with agricultural experts out there and they talked about many of the same things that we talked about dealing with wheat, and I don't know what was going on in the
And in those areas, corn production was increasing rapidly at this time.
Even a little bit earlier.
Faster than any other crop.
But I think that the reason is that
If you follow U.S.
patterns, you get no place in the third world.
Because the extension service functions, universities function, the agribusiness has got their own specialty services, the machinery companies, but you don't have any of these in third world countries.
And if you rely on those, nothing happens.
They don't exist.
Okay, let's go to India.
Why were you sent to India?
Well, first, on this trip, I said that they were all short of trained people except two, India and Pakistan.
And there they were fiddling around with a lot of mutation genetics that I thought was pretty worthless.
And Egypt was pretty sophisticated.
Where have they been trained?
Cambridge and places like that.
Western European institutions, mostly in the UK.
And so when I got back to Rome to write this report, and I saw this soil fertility or infertility problem everywhere I went.
I got back to Rome, I wrote this report and I suggested that the Rockefeller Foundation and FAO set up a program, a practical training program, to pick out the best young people.
We couldn't handle many.
Six to eight each year at the most.
be sent to Mexico, financed by the Rockefeller Foundation, identified by FAO, from those countries.
And we would give them a hands-on training in the Mexican program, where they could see what the payoff had been.
They could see it on farms as well.
And then, at the same time, it so happened that they were holding a FAO.
Frank Parker was then
He was one of the good soil scientists, Americans, holding a world conference on fertilizer.
And so I spent a couple of days with him and gave him a good push about the disaster of no fertilizer in this country.
So the report went in and the next year these people started to come to Mexico.
I think the first year we had six or seven.
One from Libya, from Egypt, from Lebanon, or from Syria, excuse me, Turkey, Iran, Pakistan.
No Indians.
They didn't think that this was sophisticated enough.
Nobody would know anything in Mexico.
they fell?
Sure.
The Pakistanis were there.
And of course, we didn't have, we were down to practically no staff, so I used to work with pretty much full-time with these people, but integrate them right into the Mexican program.
But I would spend two, two and a half hours every morning with them,
starting in with a little Spanish, a few words so that they could communicate, and then about the various aspects, the breeding, the soils, and the this and the that and the other.
Then we'd put them so many days in actually making crosses and tagging plants and selecting, or out there with fertilizer tests and try to give them an insight into all of those things.
direct participation.
And going out on farms, out on the irrigation districts, farmers' co-ops, the first group stayed a year.
First groups.
Then we had to cut it back when the demand grew to six months.
But, of course, these little dwarf wheats were really hot.
And these boys used to start
I've already mentioned that we had this international stem rust nursery that was coordinated by the USDA that went back to 1950 or 51 that was going to all of these countries.
In 1958 we had established the first inter-American spring wheat yield nursery.
This was at the request
of my Latin American scientific colleagues.
I should have pointed out that going way back in 1948, Herrera and Wellhausen and I, Niederhauser, organized the first Latin American science wing.
The first one was in breeding on wheat and corn.
And I think we had about eight people from South American countries, that's all we could find, that were of that caliber.
or a few people, and then some of our junior staff that presented little short papers.
That was the first Latin American science meeting.
The next year it was on plant pathology and entomology.
By 1958, this had grown into a pretty big organization.
Not by standards of today, but for the time.
And it was holding its meeting in 58 in Santiago, Chile.
And at that meeting, the wheat scientist said, look, why don't we establish a uniform yield test where we include the main varieties of spring weeds from Canada, the US, Mexico, Guatemala, all of the Latin countries.
And so I said, all right, you send me seed and I'll grow the seed and multiply it and we'll make up the test and send them out.
And so that we started to get going.
And of course, these students,
used to participate in taking the notes on these yield tests and also summarizing the data when they came in and preparing the thing.
We had the seed plots for the next year's test and we'd decide which ones.
We soon had more than we could put into the 25 varieties, so we'd have to choose.
And they participated in this.
Second year, they said, well, that was before we had the dwarfs in the thing.
And by then, we had quite a bit of data already that showed that the Canadian northern hard red springs, even the Argentinians, wouldn't fit anywhere in lower latitudes.
length of day sensitive to the point where they were completely ineffective.
That's why we'd never been able to use them.
And it was becoming ever more clear.
And so they said, well, why don't we make one near Middle East Mexican yield test, the students said, so we don't have all of this garbage.
I said, all right, let's make one.
So we started to get varieties from their country.
But we would put one Canadian or one US, generally two, of these sensitive so that we could, that everybody would see.
So we started having this one also.
So we had two of them that we were coordinating.
The one across the Americas, from Argentina to Canada, that had representatives of all of the commercial varieties, plus some experimental ones.
Then the one going
from Pakistan to Mexico with just those except for two cheques that fit the short days.
Well, this was pretty interesting to them.
After three years, then we scrubbed those two and made one, the International Spring Wheat Yeel Nursery.
This has gone on now for twenty-some years.
And that has generated tremendous information on adaptation, response to diseases.
It's grown at about 175 locations around the world at the present time.
My goodness.
And all the data comes back in.
And this is not just on disease, but its yield of grain and maturity and height and a whole series of data.
And where's the center for the data?
It comes into our CIMIT Center.
It goes through the computers and we get
a little summary that goes out to everybody.
And it's kind of like a Bible.
He who knows how to use it, knows how to plan ahead for their program, their own breeding programs, their national program.
Then we soon added another screening.
All of the thousands or millions of plants we handle in the Mexican cement program each year.
The best, about a thousand go into
preliminary yield test, replicated plots.
From this we picked the 250 best.
One envelope from each of those made into sets and goes to about 225 places around the world.
We encourage these people to select the best for their own use, name them, do whatever they want to, reselect them.
This has fed lots of material into those programs.
It gives
These young people who know this material, they can grab some of those and run and become famous with them in a hurry.
Give them national names.
All of this goes back to those early few years before we had those tests, this international one.
These young people would take samples of all of the things.
I used to tell them, take whatever you want, a little sample.
And after 19...
61, we'd start getting letters.
Some of these look pretty good over here.
62, more so.
And by then, in Pakistan, Ford Foundation was there, and they were in bad shape, just like India was in food.
But the first Pakistani came in 60, fall of 60.
And say for one year in Mexico.
Right.
And then another one came the next year, and every year for ten years or so, there were sometimes two or three.
And they'd take back samples.
Same way to Egypt.
Those were the two that got the thing going.
And then Swami Nath and so on, that international rust nursery, not the yield nursery, he didn't go any of those.
They didn't want to participate.
That wasn't sophisticated enough.
But he saw in that USDA International Rust Nursery, those five little weeds, little dwarf ones.
And so he went to his superiors and to Ralph Cummings of the Rockefeller Foundation who had a small corn program in India and asked if it would be possible to have me come and talk to them about their wheat program.
So I went and I saw, this would have been in 63, spring.
I saw those, I was there for a month.
Traveled around, looked at their experiment stations and looked at those little five wheats and they were pretty miserable damn things.
They were the earliest ones that we ever put in an international test.
And he asked if, that is Swamy Natham, who is now the director of Erie, he was then a very junior wheat scientist in the botany division, later moved up through the ranks to become the director of the Indian Agriculture
Research Institute and then the head of the Indian Council for Agricultural Research and then the head of the Planning Commission before he went to Rice Institute.
But at that time, he was in the third echelon.
And present at the last meeting was Dr. Pal, who was then the director of the Indian Agricultural Research Institute and the Dean of Agriculture, Dr. A.B.
Joshi.
and I said, well, I can't tell you whether these have a chance of contributing anything to your wheat program or not, but I can see that you've got the same trouble we used to have all of these damn tall varieties, and if you try to fertilize it, it's all down on the ground.
But I said, I can find out if you're interested.
I'll stop in Pakistan on the way back, and in Egypt, and I'll tell you whether these things will fit.
So, I arranged to fly to Pakistan and to Egypt and route back.
When I got there, I had advised Aldor Hanson, who was the head of the Ford Foundation activities in Pakistan.
He was a newspaper man himself, not an agricultural scientist, but nonetheless, later, ten years later,
or a little more.
He became the director general of Ciment when Weillhausen retired.
But he had told them that I was coming and so the Secretary of Agriculture was there at Lahore.
All of their scientists and a few farmers, Hal Hanson, we looked at the wheat plots and the ones that they had close to the director's office, the Mexican wheats didn't look good at all compared to their
but I could see they planted them the wrong times and they hadn't fertilized them right.
And I kept, the director kept explaining these plots and I said, but you haven't planted these right.
He said, well, I said, you didn't fertilize them enough, you didn't.
And we're still in India now?
You're in Pakistan.
Oh, so, okay.
This is when I was in Pakistan.
So you're on your way back now?
Looking, looking at it.
Okay, okay.
And I said, I can't tell him what you've done to these weeds.
And he said, well, this is the way you've got to grow wheat in Pakistan.
I wasn't at all convinced, but we had supper at the staff house.
Hanson and I stayed there that night in different rooms, and these two young people who had been in Mexico the last two years came to me after we had our chicken and curry.
They were leaving before Hal and I went to our room, and they said,
We know you're leaving at 10 on the flight at 10 o'clock tomorrow.
We got something we want to show you early.
I said, what time?
He said, daylight.
I said, all right, I'll be ready.
Before we went to bed that time, I talked to Hal.
He always carries a little Scotch whiskey, so we had one of those.
It's Muslim country, of course, and so we had one in our bedroom before we went to bed.
And I said, by God, the way they planted those things, Mexican weeds didn't have a chance.
So, at daylight, they were ready, and I went out with these two young people, Bajwa, who was the head of all of their wheat program at the present time, Mohammed Bajwa, and Noah Chowdhury.
And way in the back corner of the station, there they were, four strips about
half as wide as this room, about 20 meters long.
Beautiful.
Just as beautiful as they were in the Yaqui Valley.
And I said, why the hell didn't you grow them like that out there where all of the demonstration plots were by the director's house?
He said, they wouldn't let us.
I could see that feeling.
Jealousy?
Sure.
I went to Cairo, went out to the Saka station, or El Ham Talat,
who was in that same first group, he had a lot of these weeds that he had taken back growing.
And out by the director's place, same thing, miserable.
Way back behind, beautiful.
Same damn thing.
So, when I got back to Mexico, I wrote a hasty report because we were harvesting.
Told them that these things would go.
To get going, we'd send them some seed.
That's the way it went.
Next year, Pakistan imported a couple hundred kilos of seed.
The second year, we sent in, to India, we sent in about 250 limes in small rows and about 100 kilos of four varieties.
Sonora, 64, 63.
Pankhamon, Lermanrojo.
Same to Pakistan.
And in 63 I spent a month in Pakistan, or in India.
Every year I've been going to Pakistan from 60 on.
Did the same strain that worked well in that back part in Pakistan work well, first in Pakistan when they decided to do it properly, to plant it properly, and second in India?
And after one year, that was 63, or 64 when we sent in 100 kilos.
Then we got Glen Anderson over there in India, and at the same time we put Narvaez, head of the Mexican program, another guy was back to take that over in Pakistan.
And then we start to move, 65, 300 tons of...
Mexican wheat seed to India, 350 to Pakistan.
It was shipped out about the last day of August.
I don't remember the exact, but you can find out it was the day before the war broke out between India and Pakistan.
Everything went wrong with that ship.
Couldn't get it across the border because of red tape.
They were holding and paying damage on the
a freighter in Los Angeles.
Finally, when it got across, Narvaez was there loading it, and Wellhausen was on vacation, so he insisted I stay in the office.
I'm like a mad tiger when I have to stay in the office.
And, finally, we got it across the border, thirty truckloads.
And then, that weekend, the Watts riots were on.
to confuse the highway transport.
Finally, I got a call Saturday noon from Narvaez.
He said, the trucks are here and we're loading and we'll ship out either early morning or late tonight.
He says, is everything in order?
And I said, I got a check here that nobody wants to cash.
The check was made to the Mexican seed organization, PRONACE.
national producer of seed for the Mexican government.
They had three misspelled words on it and the bank wouldn't cash it.
So, I said, I'll fix it on Monday morning.
Well, to make a long story short, next afternoon the war was on and all hell broke loose.
Then, of course, the Mexican seed organization wanted to know where their money was.
This was Pakistan check.
The Indian check was paid by the foundation, so there was no problem there.
So, they kept calling me every two or three hours.
Of course, I was helpless.
But I wired the Minister of Agriculture in Pakistan and thought I was in a hell of a shape.
About a week later, I got a telegram back from me.
He says, I got trouble too with bombs falling in my front yard over here, but something's wrong with that check.
The money was deposited and we'll get it straightened around, which eventually happened.
This seed organization reported this to New York Rockfellow office.
What a miserable administrator I was, and it really got to be muddy before the thing was unsettled.
Narvaez went to Pakistan to start planting in the Anderson in India, and I went first to Pakistan.
The ship was delayed.
They figured it would all be confiscated in Bombay, in Pakistan, so they unloaded the Pakistan stuff in Singapore.
And then there was a jam up with the war on in the harbor, both in Bombay and in Karachi.
That delayed it, and we had to get military permission to move it through.
The result was that it got there a month too late.
So, we had no chance to check the germination.
We started planting, and I told you already, miserable germination.
So, we had to send out telegrams through the minister in both countries.
Narvaez and I in Pakistan.
Anderson was in India, and we couldn't communicate with him.
We didn't know whether he knew what was happening.
Talked to the minister and told him we had to send telegrams to double the seeding rates.
He wasn't very happy.
I wouldn't have been either, but he did.
We had still a poor stand, but we put on more fertilizer and more water, and by the time harvest,
rolled along, everybody thought it was very good.
It was only probably 75% of what it should have been, but it was good by comparison.
In the same way, as soon as we saw what had happened, I wired Wellhausen back in Mexico, my chief, and told him what had happened, and he talked to the minister, and the minister sent inspectors up to the government seed warehouses, took out those samples, and I told you they germinated anywhere from 10 to 30%.
because of overfumigation.
The government seed organization had been blaming this on the shipping line.
Of course, that was just a way out.
And I told Wellhausen to wire Anderson and tell him to double the seeding rates.
So then I left Pakistan and went back to the Arab countries and flew to South India and up.
found Anderson had done the same thing as we'd done in Pakistan.
And they kept putting more fertilizer and more water and they tillered well there too.
By then the drought and hunger was miserable in both countries, worse in India.
And that harvest, even Sourmaniam,
ordered 18,000 tons of Mexican wheat seed.
He sent three people over to buy it, inspect it in the field, erogue it, new sacks, clean it, ship it, and it arrived 99 percent germination.
So, from one year from 300 tons of wheat seed to 18,000 tons the next year?
in India.
Pakistan didn't import any in 66, 67 they imported 32,000 tons.
How about the productivity?
How about the increase in production?
Was it the same type of fantastic results over the years as it was in Mexico, for example, going from 10 to 100 bushels?
In India, we wanted to stack the cards in those early times.
I wanted to show what the potential was.
Out on special tests on farms, we ran a series of levels of fertilizers so you could plot the curve.
The response was 40, 80, 120, 160 kilos of nitrogen per hectare.
But out on the demonstrations, I always wanted 120 minimum.
to provoke shock.
I didn't want any of this 40 kilos.
Maybe it was the weather and maybe it was better this year than the last because I've been through the shock treatment and everybody was saying, ah, in Mexico you maybe were able to convince those farmers, but our farmers are ultra-conservative, both India and Pakistan.
And of course, I had these economists hanging around my neck all the time, trying to tell me what levels of fertilizer I should be putting on.
They were worried about equity already.
When I wasn't worried a damn bit about equity at this point, I just wanted to provoke shock.
This was with the 300, but especially with that 18,000, awesome.
I said, I want such a big difference that a blind man can see it.
And I want the grass roots to catch fire.
this isn't the time to worry about equity of distribution of that fertilizer.
And it was pretty heated discussions.
And I won.
And when you looked at it, you knew in 67 that it was going to fly.
Spring of 67.
And every time you'd stop... The crops were coming up at that rate.
Every time you'd look at those fields, driving a jeep, pick up, stop, Anderson, Swami, Nath, and I in India, and Nacho, and Kreshi in Pakistan, you stop to look at these plots, farmer's fields, you didn't want to spend too much time, you just want to get there.
and look just to see as many as possible.
And hell, there were 200, 300 people standing by the Jeep when you got back out and somebody grabbed you by the sleeve and point down the road, you're supposed to come and see his.
And there was no question any longer.
The last day in India, for example, I should go back, retrogress again,
Pakistan made the decision on pricing before India, even though it didn't bring in that second year in 66 any more seed.
It had the product from those 350 tons, enough to put on pretty big on-farm demonstration.
And before that, at a meeting
See, I'm going back a year now.
I'm sorry to confuse this.
But in Pakistan, the minister had invited Hal Hanson, Narvaez, and I to come to Lahore when the president had one of his big political meetings there.
Now, Narvaez had put in the president Ayub Khan's orchard, citrus orchard, between the rows.
He planted one of those early,
best weeds and he fertilized it heavily and it was beautiful.
The president saw it and he had gotten interested in this.
He was a farmer himself.
So, the minister wanted us to come to this, it was really political meeting, there were hundreds and hundreds of people there and after all of the talking, before the final wrap-up
They have tea hallways, the English custom.
And up on the speaker's platform, so high off the ground that this beautiful big governor's mansion, lawn, the minister came down to Hanson and Narvaez and I, he said, Borlaug, the minister says the president wants to talk to you.
So I went up there and he said, you know,
The president of Pakistan, Ayub Khan, he was a graduate, he was a general, a graduate from Sandhurst in Britain.
A good administrative officer also.
And he said, I've been impressed with that wheat I see out in my orchard and with the other things that they have shown me.
He said, what do I do now to make this go?
And so I said, all right, we gotta have fertilizer.
And about this kind and about this much.
We gotta have credit for that little guy to buy it.
So that he can buy the fertilizer at time of planting, pay for your harvest.
And then you've gotta pre-announce the price of wheat before planting.
And it has to reflect the price of the international market.
And I say, all of these pieces have to go together.
You've got the seed now.
We know how to plant it.
That's been done.
but you gotta get all of these pieces together in that right package.
And I said, it's no different.
I said, I'm gonna talk to you as though it were in a military advance.
You gotta have the coordination between the Air Corps and the tanks and the infantry or else nothing happens except you get all chewed up.
And this is the way it is in all of these inner disciplines.
He says, I catch you.
And so we left.
That night we went back to Karachi, and Hanson and I, and we wrote the report for the month that we'd been there.
And I made this recommendation about this fertilizer.
Hanson got all upset the month that I was asking for, and also the price for the grain.
And he wouldn't believe me on the fertilizer, and finally he called Haldor
Advar Arsik, who was a Norwegian economist that Hansen had taken out from the Harvard group and put as a confidant of the minister.
And Advar always used to travel with Nacho and I. He's the only economist that ever used to go with us everywhere in the field to see those plots.
And he knew.
Hal says, this damn guy, Norm here, he's crazy about this fertilizer.
He says, here's what he's requested.
He says, how much should I cut it back?
And Advar says, the amount is right, ordered or requested.
And we talked about the credit and about the pricing.
And Advar says, okay.
And so Hassan was convinced and he wrote a letter, he wrote jointly a letter to the Ayub.
And I left to catch the plane to go back to Mexico.
And he said, I'll give this letter to Ayub tomorrow, hand delivered, which he did.
And in a week, Ayub made all of those decisions, just like that.
And that put them ahead of Pakistan, of India.
So they did all three things right there, right on the spot?
In a week.
What year was this, 66?
This was in the 66.
Because the president was behind it.
And that knocks down a lot of the bureaucrats who were trying to trip you up and knock you down.
And what were the results of next year?
Damn near self-sufficient.
no not the next year two years down the road 66 very good all right now we move on to 67 because in 66 right at this time when I got back to Mexico I got a telegram I'd been in India first that Indian government was sending three people to buy 18,000 tons of seed so I went with them up to farther north because the harvest was already done when we got the telegram in the Yaqui Valley so I went to Irmasil and helped them
get the things in order they imported that planted all of that the next year and that's when we got in the big fight with the economist in India about how much fertilizer well before we get into that tell me about the production increases in Pakistan in those plots in those plots well it's still in the first year the 350 tons of course
would only have been about 3,500 hectares, no impact on total production, but with the way we had the fertilizer stack, even with the bad germination, we had 75, 80 bushel wheat.
The next year, where he was setting the stage for it, we had 95, 1995.
Not all of them, but I mean, you could see that,
What you want is the maximum to show the people.
Then you have to cut back because you know that for several years you aren't going to have that much fertilizer.
And that's where you have to have the equity of distribution.
You have to go to sixty kilos per hectare on twice as much land or even forty.
So you cut back the fertilizer fifty percent or maybe even sixty percent.
So you can distribute it to all the people.
Because you don't have enough, yeah.
So you can distribute it to all the people, and then at that time you had enough seed for nationwide.
Well, not the first one.
But the second year you did.
The second year, pretty much.
Except that then there was a new kind of weed out in Mexico that they preferred.
So that's when they came over and bought the 32,000 tons, and they forced the Mexican government into...
into a pocket to sell them about 2,000 tons of one that they wanted badly because of its kind of grain that they preferred.
But now... And what was a result as far as productions two years down the line where they sell some... In 68, which was when you resigned, I happened to be there and looked at the harvest.
I went into, with Hanson, Narvaez and Harthik, the same economists.
No, Hanson had been transferred by then to Africa, and so there was another man there from Michigan State who represented the Ford Foundation, who's now their international director of programs.
His name escapes me right at the moment.
Anyway, the four of us went to see Ayub and told him that the crop was
essentially self-sufficiency in 68, spring of 68.
It might have been self-sufficiency.
And before he left, he told me, as the rest of them had left, he said, I haven't announced to the press yet, but I'm resigning tomorrow.
I had a third heart attack.
And he said, it'll kill me.
And he said, I think it's far enough along so that it'll go, this wheat thing, this food thing.
And sure enough, he announced it.
And then the drum beating started, Jesus, and all of the confusion came to Pakistan.
So I was writing the report.
Narvaez was transferred then to Lebanon for the...